# Introduction to population-based threshold (PBT) models

This app is an interactive and easy-to-use implementation of the functions needed to analyze data using population-based threshold (PBT) models. In general, this involves identifying a normal distribution of the thresholds of individuals in the population to respond to a specific factor. Based upon these sensitivity thresholds, factors elicit responses from the fraction of the population whose thresholds are exceeded by the factor concentration. As the factor level increases, additional individuals are recruited to respond as their thresholds are exceeded. At the same time, the response rate (speed) increases in proportion to the amount by which the factor level exceeds an individual’s threshold. This results in a family of response time courses with characteristic shapes that indicate the interaction of the factor level and the response threshold distribution on the timing (kinetics) and maximum of the response. From dose-response time courses of the population, which are common across biology, the parameters of the threshold distribution (mean and standard deviation) and the time constant (determining the kinetic response) can be derived. Using those parameters, the responses of the population to any factor concentration can be predicted or compared across treatments.

The first and paradigmatic application of PBT models was to analyze seed germination, as seeds are individuals and they exhibit a wide range of sensitivities to many factors, such as temperature, water, hormones, dormancy, aging, etc. (Gummerson, 1986; Bradford, 1990; Bradford and Bello, 2022). The seed germination sections in this app enable the analysis of germination time course data involving these factors and further information can be found in each section below. Applications of these analyses in relation to seed quality have also been discussed (Bradford and Bello, 2023).

In addition, PBT models have many potential additional applications across biology (Bradford, 2026). Individuals are present at every level of complexity in biology, from molecules to organisms and ecosystems. At the molecular and cellular levels, single-molecule and single-cell methods are revealing the remarkable heterogeneity that exists (Hu et al., 2024; Kanatani et al., 2024), in contrast to the dogma that, for example, all enzyme or receptor molecules are identical (Neubig et al., 2003). Similarly, diversity among individuals extends from single-celled organisms to tissues, organs, organisms and species. PBT models provide an approach to analyze such data and extract information, rather than considering such variation as simply “noise” or “error”. At this time, such applications have not been explicitly coded into this app. However, researchers at all biological levels of complexity can adapt their data to using these protocols by collecting dose-response and time course data for their experimental system or developing similar methods specific to their fields.

## Seed Germination

Population-based threshold (PBT) models describe and predict seed germination performance under most conditions (Bradford and Bello, 2022). These models are fueled by germination timing data collected after seed imbibition of water at a range of levels of the conditions of interest. The models use a nonlinear least squares function (Bates and Watts, 1988; Bates and Chambers, 1992) for each model by comparing the raw data and respective treatments directly with the curves predicted by the selected model and minimizing the error. By simultaneously analyzing data from multiple factor levels or dosages, the approach identifies the common parameters of the population: the mean and standard deviation of the sensitivity threshold distribution and the time constant indicating the speed of the responses.

## Data preparation

Analyses begin by preparing Excel files with labeled columns indicating the key features of the data, such as the temperature, water potential, hormone concentration, etc. From the Upload Data tab, you can download a template file showing the available factors as column headings. Data can be entered into the relevant columns, leaving the others blank. Proper data preparation is required to avoid issues when working with this PBTM package. Use of these data templates is not required, but if you use different column names you will have to match them to the expected names after uploading your data.

Columns that specify treatment information (e.g., TrtID, GermWP) need to have the value of that treatment repeated in the row for each member of that treatment. Each row (observation) also needs to have a value for CumTime (cumulative elapsed time) and CumFraction (decimal fraction of the total seed population germinated as of that time point; ranges from 0 to 1). The treatment identification (TrtID) and treatment description (TrtDesc) columns allow specification of different treatment types or levels for user identification purposes. The factor columns are described in more detail in the table, and the types of values expected are indicated.

## Upload Data

Upload your own data here or select one of the sample datasets to get started. Several types of sample datasets are provided that you can click to upload, or you can use Browse to select your own file. Once a data file is uploaded, the list on the left of the screen will indicate (green check) which of the models can be applied with that data. If none are indicated, check the data file to be sure that the expected type of data is loaded in the columns.